# Assess protein dynamics & post-translational modifications through ELIXIR Belgium Node services: B2BTools & Scop3P

[add-bioschemas file='_data/metadata.yaml']

## Authors

[cards class_name="authors" cols="2"(./docs/assets/cards/author_cards.yaml)]

## Lesson overview

!!! overview ""
    :fontawesome-regular-bookmark: **Description**  
    The breakthrough of AlphaFold2 delivered structural models for nearly all proteins lacking experimental structures, opening new avenues to interrogate both sequence and structure. However, these models capture static snapshots rather than the dynamic conformational ensembles that govern protein behaviour. 
    
    </br>
    
    The Bio2Byte Tools, published as B2BTools, is  a suite of sequence-based predictors for unveiling the biophysical properties hidden in the amino acid language with ease: backbone dynamics, early folding events, disordered positions among other features. Developed by the lab led by Prof. Dr. Wim Vranken, this online platform is part of the ELIXIR Belgium node services. In parallel to this suite of tools, Scop3P, another ELIXIR Belgium node service, will allow you to  explore and understand the impact of phospho-sites on human protein structure and function. It can serve as a springboard for researchers seeking to analyse and interpret a given phosphorylation site or phosphoprotein in a structural, biophysical, and biological context.
    
    
    </br>
    
    :fontawesome-solid-arrow-left: **Prerequisites**  
    Basic knowledge on proteins, protein structures are a plus. Python language skills are recommended (not mandatory) to follow the Jupyter Notebook examples on Google Colab platform.
    
    </br>
    
    :fontawesome-solid-arrow-right: **Learning Outcomes:**  
    By the end of the course, learners will be able to:  
    
    1. Calculate and analyse protein biophysical profiles for sequence-based data.
    </br>
    2. Perform exploratory structural analysis combining the AlphaFold predictions with biophysical profiles generated by the B2BTools. 
    </br>
    3. Compare the impact on protein dynamics by introducing mutations with B2BTools. 
    </br>
    4. Able to correlate biophysical properties to post-translational modifications (PTMs). 
    </br>
    
    </br>
    
    :fontawesome-solid-users: **Target Audience:** VIB PhD student, VIB postdoc, VIB staff scientist, VIB group leader or expert, VIB administrative support, VIB technical support, Flemish academic or researcher, non-Flemish academic or researcher, Industry professional.  
    
    </br>
    
    :fontawesome-solid-stairs: **Level:** The workshop is aimed for anyone who uses bioinformatics tools to understand proteins. The class is open to all regardless of their field.  
    
    :fontawesome-solid-lock: **License:** [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)  
    
    :fontawesome-solid-money-bill-1: **Funding:** This project has received funding from [VIB](https://vib.be).  

    [comment]: # (Property in Bioschema: description)
    [comment]: # (Property in Bioschema: coursePrequsites)
    [comment]: # (Property in Bioschema: teaches)
    [comment]: # (Property in Bioschema: audience)
    [comment]: # (Property in Bioschema: educationalLevel)
    [comment]: # (Property in Biochema: licence)
    [comment]: # (This is an example for CONVERGE)

<!-- #### Contributors

[cards class_name="contributors" cols="6"(./docs/assets/cards/contributor_cards.yaml)]
Greek Mythology icons made by [max.icons](https://www.flaticon.com/authors/maxicons) from [www.flaticon.com](www.flaticon.com) -->

---
## Citing this lesson

Please cite as:

  1. Enter your training citation here.
  2. **Pathmanaban Ramasamy**, Demet Turan, Natalia Tichshenko, Niels Hulstaert, Elien Vandermarliere, Wim Vranken, & Lennart Martens. (2020). Scop3P: A Comprehensive Resource of Human Phosphosites within Their Full Context.  Journal of Proteome Research 2020 19 (8), 3478-3486. [https://10.1021/acs.jproteome.0c00306](https://10.1021/acs.jproteome.0c00306)
  3. Luciano Porto Kagami, Gabriele Orlando, Daniele Raimondi, Francois Ancien, Bhawna Dixit, Jose Gavaldá-García, **Pathmanaban Ramasamy**, Joel Roca-Martínez, Konstantina Tzavella, Wim Vranken, b2bTools: online predictions for protein biophysical features and their conservation, Nucleic Acids Research, Volume 49, Issue W1, 2 July 2021, Pages W52–W59. [https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab425](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab425)
  4. Geert van Geest, Elin Kronander, Jose Alejandro Romero Herrera, Nadja Žlender, & Alexia Cardona. (2023). The ELIXIR Training Lesson Template - Developing Training Together (v1.0.0-alpha). Zenodo. [https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7913092](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7913092). 

---
## Setup

### Data setup
To follow the hands-on activities you need use proteins in FASTA format and having a UniProt identifier:

```fasta
>P01308
MALWMRLLPLLALLALWGPDPAAAFVNQHLCGSHLVEALYLVCGERGFFYTPKTRREAE
DLQVGQVELGGGPGAGSLQPLALEGSLQKRGIVEQCCTSICSLYQLENYCN
```

### Software setup
To run this course you need to:

- Have in mind a TOKEN that will be used to access your B2BTools predictions.
- A Google Account (in general, your `@gmail.com` email) to login on [Google Colab](https://colab.google.com).
